---
title: Barne Kleinen | Information zu Abschlussarbeiten
author: kleinen
layout: default
NoStripedTables: true
---

# Topic Ideas for Theses

| My main areas of interest are      |     |     | Weitere Informationen zu Abschlussarbeiten   |     |
|:---------------------------------- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| * Web Technology                   |  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;   | &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    |     |     |
| * Software Engineering             |     |     |* [Zur Betreuung von Abschlußarbeiten](./betreuung)     |     |
| * Usability / User Centered Design |     |     |* [How to Abschlussarbeit](./anleitung)     |     |
| * Continuous Delivery and DevOps   |     |     |* [Hinweise zum Kolloqium](./kolloquium)     |     |
| * Agile Development                |     |     |* [Info auf FB4 Seite](https://www.f4.htw-berlin.de/studieren/abschlussarbeit-kolloquium/)     |     |
| * Collaborative Learning           |     |     |* [Info auf HTW Seite](https://www.htw-berlin.de/studium/studienorganisation/pruefungen-praktikum/abschlussarbeit/)     |     |
|                                    |  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    |     |     |     |

# Topic Ideas and Suggestions

## Context: Existing Software Projects

I've collected a range of projects that tackle processes and functionality needed
at the HTW - with the aim of developing against a real use case which is
accessible for students.

The first version of the **IMI-Map** supports the Administration of Internships in
our Bachelor's Program since the Summer Term of 2013 and has been developed
and extended in various bachelor's theses and three practice projects.

The **Module-Handbook** was the basis of a the collaborative editorial process between
several universities to create the initial curricula for the 12 study programs
for the newly founded  German International University of Cairo. It is currently
both beeing ported into the IT of the GIU in Cairo in order to be the basis for
further content maintenance as well as the data source for information on the website.
It was supplemented with the **Study Plan** to plan a individual's student studies
and manage registration for elective courses.

See my
[List of Software-Projects]({{< ref "/software_projects" >}}) for all projects and more info.

Ideas to extend the projects in any way are always welcome.

The extensions of the existing projects- as well as maybe new projects -
can have a focus either on functional extensions and technology, on usability,
(either user centered design or usability evaluations and improvement) or on
process design and support.


## Module Handbook

### Student Record

Reusable and uniform course descriptions - as provided by the Module Handbook -
can be the basis of a comprehensive student record: a nicely formatted list of
all  classes taken including module and content descriptions, which can be included
by students in their CVs, e.g. for job or grant applications.
This should be combined with the "Study Plan", a Mevn-Based Application that
allows for planning. Possible focus could be on technical solutions for verifying
the reports, and integration of semester content and versioning thereof.

### Markdown Editor and Wysiwig Editing

While content in the module handbook can be provided using markdown, no support
for markdown editing exists. How can (some kind of) wysiwig editor be included
in the module handbook? What needs to be done to generalize this approach?
How can editing of module descriptions be made more intuitive?
(here's a page where I tinkered a bit which might be a possible starting point:
[Markdown Editor](/markdown-editor/markdown-editor.html))

[Markdown Editor](/markdown-editor/markdown-editor.html))

### Module Handbook Interface Overhaul

A great part of the current Interface still consists of views generated by the
rails scaffolding, including a direct access to the link table (CourseProgram).
While this simple draft turned out to be quites useful, this can be done better.
This Thesis can be done with a user centered design approach, detailing and
differentiating various use cases and their requirements, or a have a focus
on a systematic usability evaluation.

### Module Handbook: Growing Faculties

Since it's initial start in 2020 the GIU has grown, and the Module-Handbook needs
to grow accordingly: Editorial Processes become more complex, and a layer of
faculties needs to be built in.

## IMI-Map Migration and Data Mining

The IMI-Map has been ported to MEVN. The next step is to put the MEVN Version
into Production, without

## Word Wide Web

### Homepage for All

30 years after the invention of the WWW publishing own content
on web has actually become somewhat difficult: expectations of a high visual
standard, legal reasons and pricing legal reasons, partly to pricing.
While publishing a web site for free can be easy and fast (e.g. with github
pages, Hugo and a free hosting service), these solutions are not really accessible
without some coding background.

Content Management Systems like Wordpress are often the go-to solution, but are
overly complex for most use cases. Commercial solutions exists, but will often
lock in your content in a proprietary system.

How can this gap be closed?
How can web publishing be made accessible again?

Providing a Front-End for the static web site generator Hugo may be a solution,
similar solutions are out there, like [HokusCMS](https://www.hokuscms.com/)
but without local installation.
(Here's a [list of Hugo frontends](https://gohugo.io/tools/frontends/))

----------


# Former Topics

## Module Handbook

- curricula and module descriptions underlie a complex versioning: part of the
  module description as the actual contents change each term and depending on the
  teacher, some information may only change with the official regulations.
  If you need to prove what you've already done in your studies - e.g. in order
  to get courses approved at another university - an exact record of your studies
  would be helpful:

      - How can the different regulations be modelled?
      - How can a versioning be implemented in the most simple and efficient way?

## IMI-Map

  Currently, the IMI-Map is migrated to MEVN. There most probably will be topics
  open which can be addressed within a Bachelor's or Master's thesis.


## Online Group Building

  The [Missing Tool/Onboard](https://showtime.f4.htw-berlin.de/ss20/bachelor/b5-the-missing-tool-projekt/) offers the opportunity to create topics- based groups based
  on brain-storming with post-its.
  How usable is this approach? How can it be integrated with other collaboration/communication tools?

## Web Applications

- Git as Versioning Backend: How can the power of Git be used as backend - e.g. for
  Versioning - within another app?

- Operations and Monitoring concept for the [Software Projects](/software_projects) and similar


## Gender Automation

  - Der Artikel [Belohnungen und Lob: Das vergiftete Zuckerbrot](https://www.unerzogen-magazin.de/artikel/?articleID=842)
    enthält einen Switch (das runde "G" rechts) mit dem die Art des Entgendern des
    Textes frei gewählt werden kann. Die Idee stammt von [Sören Kirchner, der diese
    und das zugehörige Script hier vorstellt](https://soeren-kirchner.medium.com/ent-gendern-von-online-publikationen-ec7c40f9e490). [https://github.com/soeren-kirchner/gendy](https://github.com/soeren-kirchner/gendy)
    In Kooperation mit ihm könnten folgende Fragen bearbeitet werden:
    - wie kann ein Editor für diese Seiten aussehen, der mit speziellen oder möglichst
      vielen Veröffentlichungsmöglichkeiten zusammenarbeitet?
    - wie könnte ein Dictionary für das Entgendern aufgebaut werden?
    - und [Sarah Bosetti: Lasst uns nie wieder übers Gendern reden!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_hqfMZnuUCI)
